pd,tidb: support affinity schedule (#22270)
pingcap/docs: table-affinity.md

---
title: Table-Level Data Affinity
summary: Learn how to configure affinity constraints for tables or partitions to control Region replica distribution and how to view the scheduling status.
---

# Table-Level Data Affinity <span class="version-mark">New in v8.5.5 and v9.0.0</span>

> **Warning:**
>
> This feature is experimental. It is not recommended that you use it in the production environment. It might be changed or removed without prior notice. If you find a bug, you can report an [issue](https://github.com/pingcap/tidb/issues) on GitHub.

Table-level data affinity is a PD mechanism for scheduling data distribution at the table level. This mechanism controls how Leader and Voter replicas for Regions of the same table or partition are distributed across a TiKV cluster.

> When PD affinity scheduling is enabled and the `AFFINITY` option of a table is set to `table` or `partition`, PD groups Regions belonging to the same table or partition into the same affinity group. During scheduling, PD prioritizes placing the Leader and Voter replicas of these Regions on the same subset of a few TiKV nodes. This reduces network latency caused by cross-node access during queries, thereby improving query performance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you enable PD affinity scheduling and set the `AFFINITY` option of a table to `table` or `partition`, PD groups Regions belonging to the same table or partition into the same affinity group. During scheduling, PD prioritizes placing the Leader and Voter replicas of these Regions on the same subset of a few TiKV nodes. This reduces network latency caused by cross-node access during queries, thereby improving query performance.
```

- **Evaluate disk capacity in advance for large data volumes**: after affinity is enabled, PD prioritizes scheduling Regions of a table or partition to the same subset of a few TiKV nodes. For tables or partitions with large data volumes, this might significantly increase disk usage on these nodes. It is recommended to evaluate disk capacity and monitor it in advance.
- Data affinity affects only the distribution of Leader and Voter replicas. If a table has Learner replicas (such as TiFlash), their distribution is not affected by affinity settings.

## Prerequisites

PD affinity scheduling is disabled by default. Before setting affinity for tables or partitions, you must enable and configure this feature.

1. Set the PD configuration item [`schedule.affinity-schedule-limit`](/pd-configuration-file.md#affinity-schedule-limit-new-in-v855-and-v900) to a value greater than `0` to enable affinity scheduling.

>    For example, the following command sets the value to `4`, allowing PD to run up to four affinity scheduling tasks concurrently:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    For example, the following command sets the value to `4`, allowing PD to run up to four affinity scheduling tasks concurrently:
```
